So let's get to layouts and
templates and let's write some code.
So we've seen layouts.
You heard me talk about layouts.
Let's just get into it.
So right now, let's go take a look at
the layout TSX that we have here and
the app that was generated for us.
And if you've ever used
the earlier version of Next.js,
you've probably are asking so
where does the like.
Where does the app file go?
Where like I write the app template,
if I wanna do something globally for
the entire app,
where's the root app basically?
Well, layouts kinda served that purpose.
So a layout, like I said earlier,
is just a component that wraps other
layouts and other pages, right?
It's like, I have some common
functionality, typically UI,
sometimes data that I want for
every single route underneath this layout.
So I'm just going to create
a component that does this.
In fact,
this was such a highly requested feature.
If you go back and
look at the older version of Next.js and
you find that the part where
they talk about layouts.
They basically say, well,
here's how you do it yourself
because we don't support it.
And it's never a really good solution.
It's just like,
they're all just trade-offs.
Now they figured it out, how to do that.
The other biggest complaint was
in the older versions of Next.js,
you could only do data fetching in pages.
But if you need to do data fetching in
a layout, let's say your layout was,
navigation on the left,
navigation on top, and
on the top,
you had to show the user's avatar.
So you had to do some type of fetching
to get the user's information here.
But if that was in a layout,
you couldn't do it on the service side
because layouts couldn't do data fetching.
So it was like you had to do all
this weird work around in order
to get this to work.
But now that's not the case,
data layouts are treated just like pages.
They are first class citizens,
they can do data fetching, and
they allow you to share UI.
So, one rule you have to
have in Next.js app router
is that you have to have a root layout.
But there's many ways you can do it.
One way you can do it is
the way that we see here.
As in there is a layout file immediately
in the root of the app file, and
this is the root layout.
This is like the app.js or JSX or
TSX that you had in the previous
version of Next.js.
It's where your whole app gets
rendered into, so you kinda need this.
You can see I'm actually using the HTML
tag here and the body and then everywhere
where you see children, that's where
the pages get rendered, right?
So the pages get rendered here.
This is also a great place to do anything
global, like I have some global CSS,
some font stuff going on here.
Don't worry about this metadata thing.
We will talk about that, but
essentially it's just a function.
It's just a component that
can do whatever it wants and
it renders its children
which are gonna be pages.
That's it.
>> This is a case where root layout is
a specially namespaced magic keyword or
it could be export
default function foobar.
>> Yeah, so this name is irrelevant.
You can call this whatever you want.
Yeah, this is just what they
generated with when we did that.
Create next app, but yeah, there is no
convention around the name of a component
in Next.js,
you can call it whatever you want.
I just prefer to keep it capital.
But yeah, this name doesn't mean anything.
You can call this literally anything.
But it is a layout.
You can see that we got some CSS here.
We got our classes.
We're wrapping our children.
And as far as like the children,
where does this come from?
Well, if you look at layout,
are there any routes that are children of
this layout as in are there any
folders that are next to it?
Yeah, so that means everything in docs,
everything in dashboard is gonna be
rendered here and any pages next to it.
So this includes this page here, right?
And just to illustrate that,
I can just move this down a little bit and
I can just say, layouts like this, right?
And then I can put the children here.
So once I put layout there and
I go back to our app,
there's always gonna be layout, right?
That's huge.
There's layout right there.
It's always gonna be here cuz
it's part of the entire app.
It's always here.
The other sweet thing about layout is
that even though the route changes,
the layout never re-renders.
It is cached.
It doesn't re-render or re-evaluate.
When you change the route,
it stays the same, which is so great for
something like a UI.
And if you had to do some of this on
your own or previous version of Next,
trying to make sure that doesn't
re-render was always a pain,
like you had to do memos and using it.
It was always a pain to try
to do that stuff yourself.
So now it doesn't.
Layouts just don't re-render.
They will always stay on the page
no matter what route you go to,
which is pretty useful.
And then you can have nested layouts,
right?
So back to our route grouping, example, if
I wanted my dashboard to have a specific
layout to it that my landing page wouldn't
have, I would add that here, right?
So in this case, I do.
My dashboard is probably gonna look
different than my landing page would.
So I'm gonna add a new layout here
in the dashboard group folder.
So I'm gonna make a new file and
I'm gonna call it layout.tsx, yes?
>> Could you fetch user
info in the route layout?
>> Yeah, you could fetch user
info on the route layout.
You could totally do that.
We'll get to data fetching in a minute,
but yeah, you can fetch data and
any, Any component,
any server component at this point.
I mean, you can also fetch
any client component, but
that's not anything you need
to Next.js such as React.
But yeah,
you can fetch data pretty much anywhere.
The only caveat though
is that you can't pass
data down from a layout to
its children through props.
You can't do that.
So, although you can't fetch data,
you cannot pass it down.
And that has a lot to do with the fact
that, one, the layouts don't get
re-rendered, so if the data changed, it's
not re-rendering it back to the children.
So it would only work the first rendered
and anytime after that, it'd be stale, so
you wouldn't wanna use it, so
that's how they keep that.
That way, it also has something to do
with how crossing the network threshold
of client and server and what can and
cannot be serialized over the network.
For instance, you can't serialize
a function over the network.
So passing a callback as a prop is,
you can't do it because you can't send
a function over the Internet but
you can send data.
So we'll talk about that when
we get to client components, but
it's a lot of limitations there.
Cool, so back here in the dashboard group,
I have layout,
I can make a new dashboard layout
Right and it's just a function that we do,
that we export.
And the only thing about layouts,
you can do whatever you want.
You just need to make sure
you render the children.
Because if you don't render the children,
they'll never show through.
It'll just only show your layout.
So just be sure to do that.
So you always wanna make sure you have
your children prop, return your div.
I'm gonna put an h1 here
that says dashboard
And if it has my children, like that.
So I have my dashboard layout.
Now, any children here should be
anything that's sibling to this layout,
which I don't have.
Anything that's a child of it,
which in case it is this todos.
So if I go to slash todos, I should
see this dashboard load up as well.
So let's try that.
There we go.
So you can see here's the route layout,
which nests the dashboard layout,
which renders this page, So
that's how we're able to nest layouts,
because they just reside in
folders underneath each other.
Now, let's say our dashboard and
our homepage were so
significantly different that I don't
want them sharing layouts, period.
Right now, they do.
Right now, they both share the root
layout, but let's say they're so
different that I don't even want that,
but I need a root layout.
Anyone wanna guess how you might
do that in this file system?
>> Tell me it's not putting app in paren.
>> Close [LAUGH] we do need more parens,
but it's not putting app in parens.
It's basically getting rid of the root
layout and making another group,
maybe call it like marketing site or
something like that, and
then putting that in parens and
putting its own layout in there.
That way there is never a layout
on the root of the app.
The only caveat with that is that, let's
say you had ten route groups on your app.
One of those route groups has
to have a page on its root.
So when someone goes to slash,
it renders, right?
So that is the only caveat.
So this isn't part of the app,
but I'll show you.
So I'll make it, so if I say folder and I
say, yeah, cool, this is marketing, right?
Now marketing has its own layout.
Then also when someone
goes to /mywebsite.com,
I want to load up this route right here.
So I put that here on the route and
then any other folders that I put
here what it's the about page.
It's the blog, right?
I can put all that in marketing.
And then I could just get
rid of this layout, right?
I can just delete this file.
If that makes sense.
And that's actually typically
how I build sites now Next.js.
Actually just do grouping like this.
I'll just have like my app and
like dashboard or
whatever, I have the landing page and
like marketing,
I might have something else over here,
admin or something like that and they're
all just their own groups with their
own layouts but it's in the same repo.
That's if you put it all on one domain.
You might just separate all this on
different websites and different domains,
but this is just like if
you need a one domain,
you just do it all here
>> Did I understand correctly
that having a layout file
in every route group,
you will not work if there
are dears that are not route group?
>> Say that again.
>> So like in this case,
we lay out TSX because the docs
directory does not have
a layout file in it.
>> Got you.
Okay, I see.
Yes, so the docs directory would need
a layout cuz it's like, where's my layout?
It wouldn't work.
It would need a layout.
So yeah, if you don't have a layout on
the root, then every folder whether
it's actual segment or group segment
has to have a layout on its route,
because every page has
to render in a layout.
Cool, yes.
>> What's the best way
to separate routing for
the marketing part of the site
versus the app part of site?
>> It comes down to whether or
not you care about the URL being changed.
So if you want the URL to
reflect those differences,
then just get rid of these parentheses,
and then you would just have,
I would say by default, have the marketing
just be folders on the route of the app.
And then have the app be grouped into
something like dashboard or slash app, and
then you can put your whole app in there,
and that's just separating
them functionally, but they were
still share the same route layout.
Now, if you want them to be completely
separated, as in like they're almost
basically two different completely apps,
they don't know about each other's routes.
They don't have the same route layout.
Then you would do what I'm doing now.
You would put two route groups, one that
represents the app that someone logs into,
one that represents the marketing website.
If you put a layout on both of them
like I have now and yeah that's it.
Now they're separated and you just need
to make sure that on your route of your
marketing, you have a page here.
So when someone goes to your website,
the route of it loads this page,
otherwise it wouldn't know where to go.
And then from dashboard, you don't have a
page here because as I showed you earlier,
those will resolve to the same conflict.
They both would just be slash.
So it's like, well,
which one are you showing?
Are you showing dashboard?
Are you showing marketing?
So in dashboard, you would just have
settings, whatever routes you have for
your dashboard you put them in here,
and that's exactly what I do.
This is literally how I make apps now.
So again, route grouping is
the best reason for route grouping,
is that I just want to opt all
these routes into this layout.
That's it.
And I don't want to change the URL.
If you do wanna change the URL,
just get rid of the parentheses.
Like we did with docs.
Docs has parenthesis on it cuz
I do want it to say slash docs.
But I don't wanna see
slash dashboard in my URL.
That's gross to me.
I don't like it, yeah.
>> So if you put it on a subdomain,
would you host a different app then?
>> Yeah, I mean, if it's on a subdomain,
you might as well just
host a different app.
I guess you could write some DevOps
logic yourself to deploy us.
I mean, I guess you can get away
with this by just doing some smart
rerouting on the Edge too.
There's a lot of ways to do it.
With today's world, with edge computing,
I guess you could just
write a function on the edge that takes
a specific path from this app and
routes it or take some specific path and
route it to the URL on this app that
will be treated like a subdomain.
But historically speaking, most people
do is like it's a different app.
[INAUDIBLE] different app that gets
deployed to a different subdomain and
you just go change the CNAME and whatever
hosting provider that you have, and
pointing to that subdomain in the DNS.
So yeah,
probably I wouldn`t do it the other way
because it sounds like a lot of work.
But I guess if you're
trying to save money,
I guess if you want to save $0.20 a year,
you could do that.
Cool, any other questions?
>> So does the same folder
in different groups collide?
>> Does the same folder in
different groups collide?
Let me see if I understand that question.
So I think what they're saying is
if I have todos in dashboard and
then I have todos in marketing.
Do they collide?
Absolutely, they do collide.
Those are the same route segments.
So and
we saw what happened when we make the two,
Next.js seems to pick
the one that comes after.
Or maybe they'll be smarter
to throw an error, but yeah,
you definitely won't get
the behavior that you want.
So you need to know what are in the other
folders when you're making other
folders with route groups.
With this one I don't have to care because
I know we're protected because it's always
going to be slash doc.
So I can put todos in here and it will
still work because there's nothing else in
here that is slash doc,
slash todos, so I'm totally fine.
But with these,
I do need to be aware of what is an other
one because these segments don't exist.
It's just our website slash todos,
our website slash about,
our website slash blog.
So I have to be aware when
we do route group and
you haven't known what other groups have.
So now what we want to do is just briefly
talk about templates and then we'll set
up some navigation to get our app
navigation working with the layouts and
things like that.
So templates, very short,
it's literally the same thing as layouts,
except they do re-render across routes.
That's it.
That's literally it.
And you can make a template
just by making a template.tsx.
You will almost never use it,
and I think they just added it back
to the documentation like a week ago.
They kept removing it and adding it,
because people were just
getting confused by it.
Also I think the naming is weird, because
I feel like layouts could be templates,
but really the only use case I've found
for templates, there's only two use cases.
One, animations.
I want something to animate in and animate
out as the route changes like a layout.
And if it's not re-rendering then
it will never leave and enter.
So a layout will never
show that animation, but
a template would because it leaves and
enters on every route change.
So if you want a route animation,
use a template.
The other use case would
be something around,
you had your template be a client-side
component as in it is a regular
React component you've ever
made your entire life.
And you have something in the use
effect that gets kicked off when
the component renders.
And you need that to happen every
time that component renders, well,
if it's a layout, it will never re-render,
so it's only gonna do that once ever.
But if you're thinking
that it's gonna happen
every time someone changes the route and
that's what you're expecting to happen,
then you would need to
switch to a template.
So it does re-render and kick off
your use effect every single time.
But then I would argue like
why are you doing that?
Like she probably do something
else somewhere else.
But if you absolutely needed it,
then yeah, other than that you'd
use the layout I think [INAUDIBLE]
was just because they could, why not,
but I don't think you'll
almost never use those.